blog: how to access kafka with gateway api (#442)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2024-08-07-accessing-kafka-with-gateway-api.md

---
layout: post
title: "Accessing Kafka with the Gateway API"
date: 2024-08-07
author: colt_mcnealy
---

At [LittleHorse](https://littlehorse.dev), we use the [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io) to allow external traffic into our kubernetes clusters. We will soon need to allow external clients to access our [Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org) clusters (managed by Strimzi, of course!) from outside of our Kubernetes clusters. We have so far been pleased with the performance and simplicity of [Envoy Gateway](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/) as a Gateway Controller, which motivated this investigation into using Envoy Gateway to access our Kafka clusters.

> ## Background

Reviewer: If you shift all the headers one level down, the website will normally render a bit better ... i.e.:
* from `##` to `###`
* from `###` to `####`
* etc.

The [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) in Kubernetes aims to replace the `Ingress` resource as the de facto standard for allowing external traffic to reach workloads running on Kubernetes. It addresses many shortcomings of the `Ingress` resource, including poor support for non-HTTP 1.0 traffic.

> ![Strimzi and Envoy Gateway](/assets/images/posts/2024-08-07-strimzi-gateway-api.png)

Reviewer: I think it might be worth mentioning in one or two sentences that the Gateway API is supported by many different tools and the one you decided to use - Envoy Gateway - is one of them. That would I think help to clarify the relationship between the Gateway API and the Envoy Gateway at the beginning.

As Jakub [noted](https://strimzi.io/blog/2019/04/17/accessing-kafka-part-1/), accessing Kafka is difficult for two reasons:

1. Kafka Clients need to be able to access specific brokers individually, so simply scattering the requests across the Kafka Cluster using a load balancer would yield incorrect results.
2. The Kafka protocol is not based on HTTP, which means that you need a few clever hacks to get it to work with plain `Ingress`.

### The Gateway API

The Gateway API is a much more flexible and extensible solution for north-south traffic than `Ingress`. The entirety of the Gateway API is beyond the scope of this post, but there are two resources in particular that will be of interest to us:

1. `TCPRoute`s, which proxy unencrypted TCP traffic.
2. `TLSRoute`s, which control encrypted TCP traffic.

> The `HTTPRoute` and `GRPCRoute` resources will not work with Kafka because Kafka does not speak an HTTP-based protocol.

Reviewer: Maybe this will make it a bit more clear for the readers?

```suggestion
The `HTTPRoute` and `GRPCRoute` resources will not work with Kafka because Kafka does not speak an HTTP or GRPC-based protocol.
```

```
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: my-gateway-class
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
  parametersRef:
    group: gateway.envoyproxy.io
    kind: EnvoyProxy
    name: my-proxy-config
    namespace: envoy-gateway-system
---
apiVersion: gateway.envoyproxy.io/v1alpha1
kind: EnvoyProxy
metadata:
  name: my-proxy-config
  namespace: envoy-gateway-system
spec:
  provider:
    type: Kubernetes
    kubernetes:
      envoyDeployment:
        replicas: 1
      envoyService:
        type: NodePort
        patch:
          value:
            spec:
              ports:
              # Port 9092 on your laptop gets forwarded to NodePort 30992 on the KIND cluster.
              - name: kafka-port
                nodePort: 30992
                port: 9092
                protocol: TCP
                targetPort: 9092
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: my-gateway

>   namespace: default

Reviewer: In many Kubernetes clusters, the `default` namespace has special properties and might not work out of the box. Would it be better to create some new namespace and use it instead of `default`?

spec:
  gatewayClassName: my-gateway-class
  listeners:
  - name: kafka-listener
    protocol: TLS
    port: 9092
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough

> ```

Reviewer: i wonder if this would be worth splitting into two blocks ...
* First block with the EnvoyProxy resource that is Envoy specific and creates the Envoy Gateway deployment
* Second with the two Gateway APi resources referencing it.

That would make it more clear which part belongs where and for example how to replace it when using different implementation. But feel free to ignore it if you think having it all in one is better.

Author: I think that's a good idea, in my opinion the stuff in the `envoy-gateway-system` namespace should be separate from the stuff in the `default`/`strimzi` namespace. The `GatewayClass` defines a type of `Gateway` (like Ingress and IngressClass for example).

The `EnvoyProxy` is an Envoy Gateway-specific CRD that configures how Envoy Gateway reconciles a specific `Gateway`.

I wanted this blog post to focus mostly on Kafka, but I guess since it's about Strimzi + Gateway API after all I should probably add this. Will put that in my next commit. Thanks Jakub!

---
layout: post
title: "Accessing Kafka with the Gateway API"
date: 2024-08-07
author: colt_mcnealy
---

At [LittleHorse](https://littlehorse.dev), we use the [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io) to allow external traffic into our kubernetes clusters. We will soon need to allow external clients to access our [Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org) clusters (managed by Strimzi, of course!) from outside of our Kubernetes clusters. We have so far been pleased with the performance and simplicity of [Envoy Gateway](https://gateway.envoyproxy.io/) as a Gateway Controller, which motivated this investigation into using Envoy Gateway to access our Kafka clusters.

### Background

The [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) in Kubernetes aims to replace the `Ingress` resource as the de facto standard for allowing external traffic to reach workloads running on Kubernetes. It addresses many shortcomings of the `Ingress` resource, including poor support for non-HTTP 1.0 traffic.

> ![Strimzi and Envoy Gateway](/assets/images/posts/2024-08-07-strimzi-gateway-api.png)

Reviewer 2: I would go with same format as you use for Strimzi. Without background (same for Kafka) it will look much better form my POV. Also maybe use a little bit better resolution? It will look better for sure

As Jakub [noted](https://strimzi.io/blog/2019/04/17/accessing-kafka-part-1/), accessing Kafka is difficult for two reasons:

1. Kafka Clients need to be able to access specific brokers individually, so simply scattering the requests across the Kafka Cluster using a load balancer would yield incorrect results.
2. The Kafka protocol is not based on HTTP, which means that you need a few clever hacks to get it to work with plain `Ingress`.

#### The Gateway API

The Gateway API is a much more flexible and extensible solution for north-south traffic than `Ingress`. The entirety of the Gateway API is beyond the scope of this post, but there are two resources in particular that will be of interest to us:

1. `TCPRoute`s, which proxy unencrypted TCP traffic.
2. `TLSRoute`s, which control encrypted TCP traffic.

> The `HTTPRoute` and `GRPCRoute` resources will not work with Kafka because Kafka does not speak an HTTP or GRPC-based protocol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `HTTPRoute` and `GRPCRoute` resources will not work with Kafka because Kafka does not speak an HTTP or gRPC-based protocol.
```

_NOTE: The `HTTPRoute` resource has reached GA in the Gateway API; however, the `TLSRoute` is still in beta. Some advise not using it, but it should be fine as long as you check release notes and test before upgrading!_

> This post will focus on the `TLSRoute`. In particular, we will use _passthrough TLS_ in which the TLS connections are terminated not at the Gateway Controller but rather at the Kafka Servers. In more detail, it looks like the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This post will focus on the `TLSRoute`. In particular, we will use _passthrough TLS_ in which the TLS connections are terminated not at the Gateway Controller but rather at the Kafka brokers. In more detail, it looks like the following:
```

![Architecture with TLSRoutes](/assets/images/posts/2024-08-07-tls-routes.png)

### Putting It Into Practice

> The rest of this blog post will walk through how to use `TLSRoute`s to access a Strimzi-managed Kafka cluster from outside of your Kubernetes cluster. We will use a [KIND](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) cluster, which allows us to run a Kubernetes cluster in docker containers on our local machine, and we will use Envoy Gateway as our implementation of the Gateway API.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The rest of this blog post will walk through how to use `TLSRoute`s to access a Strimzi-managed Kafka cluster from outside of your Kubernetes cluster. We will use a [KIND](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) cluster, which allows us to run a Kubernetes cluster in Docker containers on our local machine, and we will use Envoy Gateway as our implementation of the Gateway API.
```

If you would like to follow along without copying and pasting yaml files, you can clone a GitHub repo that I made which has all of the following code: [https://github.com/coltmcnealy-lh/strimzi-gateway-api](https://github.com/coltmcnealy-lh/strimzi-gateway-api).

#### Local Environment Overview

This example will utilize a few small hacks to make it possible to do local development with your KIND cluster. We want to access Kafka using a TLS-encrypted connection, which means that:

> 1. We'll have to create a certificate with some hostname for the Kafka servers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. We'll have to create a certificate with some hostname for the Kafka brokers.
```

If you're following along in my [GitHub repo](https://github.com/coltmcnealy-lh/strimzi-gateway-api), you can run the following:

```
kind create cluster --name strimzi-gw-api --config kind-config.yaml

# Use a namespace called "strimzi"
kubectl create ns strimzi
kubectl config set-context --current --namespace=strimzi
```

Next, let's set up Envoy Gateway. First, we will use `helm` to install it. Note that a lot of Envoy Gateway tooling (including `egctl`, the Envoy Gateway CLI) expects it to be installed in the `envoy-gateway-system` namespace, so we will do that. Strimzi is flexible enough to go anywhere.

```
helm upgrade --install envoygateway oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-helm \
    --version v1.0.1 \
    --namespace envoy-gateway-system \
    --create-namespace
```

Once the installation process is complete, we need to deploy a `Gateway` with a specific `GatewayClass` that will listen on the correct `NodePort`s. We'll refer to this `Gateway` later when we create `TLSRoute`s to access our Kafka cluster.

> Before creating the `Gateway`, we must create and configurethe `GatewayClass`. A `GatewayClass` is just like an `IngressClass`: it defines a type of Gateway which can be reconciled by a Gateway Controller. Envoy Gateway also has an additional CRD called `EnvoyProxy` which can be _attached to_ a `GatewayClass` to tell Envoy Gateway how to reconcile gateways of that class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before creating the `Gateway`, we must create and configure the `GatewayClass`. A `GatewayClass` is just like an `IngressClass`: it defines a type of Gateway which can be reconciled by a Gateway Controller. Envoy Gateway also has an additional CRD called `EnvoyProxy` which can be _attached to_ a `GatewayClass` to tell Envoy Gateway how to reconcile gateways of that class.
```

Author: Thanks, Jakub! Good catch.

> If you recall from earlier, we want to create a `GatewayClass` that is configured to run Envoy Proxy pods with a NodePort service type, mapping port `30992` on the K8s Node to port `9092` on the Envoy Proxy pods. You can do that as follows:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you recall from earlier, we want to create a `GatewayClass` that is configured to run Envoy Proxy pods with a `NodePort` service type, mapping port `30992` on the K8s Node to port `9092` on the Envoy Proxy pods. You can do that as follows:
```

```
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: my-gateway
  # Envoy Gateway can control gateways in all namespaces. Depending on your
  # cluster permissions model, a Gateway can be in the envoy-gateway-system namespace
  # or in the same namespace as your applications.
  namespace: strimzi
spec:
  gatewayClassName: my-gateway-class
  listeners:
  - name: kafka-listener
    protocol: TLS
    port: 9092
    tls:
      mode: Passthrough
```

In the github repo:

```
kubectl apply -f gateway.yaml
```

This will create a `Gateway` resource, and the Envoy Gateway controller will deploy an Envoy pod in the `envoy-gateway-system` namespace to handle traffic for that gateway class. Once that is done, you should see some pods in the `envoy-gateway-system` namespace, like the following:

```
-> kubectl get pods --namespace envoy-gateway-system
NAME                                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
envoy-strimzi-my-gateway-1c7c06f0-5446c7ff7b-vpd6m   1/2     Running   0          22s
envoy-gateway-8595cc9fbc-2bjn5                       1/1     Running   0          96s
```

> The second pod is the Envoy Gateway controller, which reconciles all Gateway API-related resources. The first `Pod` was created by the controller to route all traffic for the `my-gateway` `Gateway` which we created in the `strimzi` namespace.

Reviewer 3: So ... all this big part about deploying kind, deploying envoy, talking about mapping 9092 local to 30992 pod and then to 9092 envoy pod etc etc ... is simple to be confused and lost for someone who has never used kind first, gateway API and envoy implementation. I think a diagram with the port mapping across pods, where the gateway controller stands, the envoy pod, etc etc would be really helpful.

Author: Roger roger, will add one today. Thanks!

> Next, the most exciting part about the setup process is installing Strimzi. You can do it as follows:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, for the most exciting part of the setup: installing Strimzi. Here's how to do it:
```

    --version 0.42.0 \
    --namespace strimzi
```

Since the `TLSRoute` resource uses _passthrough TLS_, in which encryption is terminated at the Kafka broker pods, we'll need a TLS certificate to mount on the Kafka brokers. While we could use `openssl`, in this example we'll use another operator, [Cert Manager](https://cert-manager.io), to create TLS certificates for us using the `Certificate` resource.

You can install Cert Manager as follows:

```
helm upgrade --install cert-manager jetstack/cert-manager \
    --namespace strimzi \
    --version v1.15.1 \
    --set installCRDs=true
```

Next, create a self-signed `Issuer` and a `Certificate`:

```
---
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: my-certificate
  namespace: strimzi
spec:
  secretName: my-certificate
  subject:
    organizations:
    - my-org
  privateKey:
    algorithm: RSA
    encoding: PKCS8
    size: 2048
  usages:
  - server auth
  - client auth
  dnsNames:
  - '*.strimzi.gateway.api.test'
  issuerRef:
    name: my-issuer
    kind: ClusterIssuer
---
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: ClusterIssuer
metadata:
  name: my-issuer
  namespace: strimzi
spec:
  selfSigned: {}
```

> In the github repo, you can follow along via:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the GitHub repo, you can follow along via:
```

```

You should be able to see a `Secret` named `my-certificate` in the `strimzi` namespace.

The last piece of setup is to configure your `/etc/hosts` file so that you can access Kafka from outside of the cluster. This is one of two hacks that we will use to get this example to work on your local KIND box—in real life, you would probably use real DNS records to point to your Kubernetes Cluster. In this case, we want to make `*.strimzi.gateway.api.test` point to `localhost` so that it ends up hitting the KIND node (which is just a docker container running on `localhost`).

Add the following to `/etc/hosts`:

```
# For Strimzi Gateway API
127.0.0.1 bootstrap.strimzi.gateway.api.test
127.0.0.1 broker-10.strimzi.gateway.api.test
127.0.0.1 broker-11.strimzi.gateway.api.test
127.0.0.1 broker-12.strimzi.gateway.api.test
```

We will:
* Make it so that any traffic sent to those endpoints (on port `9092`) ends up at the Envoy Gateway pod(s).
* Configure our Kafka cluser to advertise the above endpoints.
* Create `TLSRoute`s that route traffic from the Envoy Gateway pods to the appropriate Kafka brokers using the Server Name Indication protocol.

#### Deploying the `Kafka` Cluster

> Let's create a Kafka cluster. Our cluster will have 1 Controller and 3 Brokers. This means we're going to need a single `Kafka` resource and two `KafkaNodePool`s.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's create a Kafka cluster in KRaft mode. Our cluster will have 1 Controller and 3 Brokers. This means we're going to need a single `Kafka` resource and two `KafkaNodePool`s.
```

```
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: '[10-100]'
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: gateway-api-test
  name: broker
  namespace: strimzi
spec:
  replicas: 3
  roles:
  - broker
  storage:
    class: standard
    size: 10G
    type: persistent-claim
---
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: KafkaNodePool
metadata:
  annotations:
    strimzi.io/next-node-ids: '[0-9]'
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: gateway-api-test
  name: controller
  namespace: strimzi
spec:
  replicas: 1
  roles:
  - controller
  storage:
    class: standard
    size: 10G
    type: persistent-claim
```

```

> kubectl apply -f kafka-node-pools.yaml

Reviewer 4: are we following along on github again here?

```

At this point, you should see the Kafka pods up and running.

```
NAME                                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
cert-manager-84489bc478-7cxds                       1/1     Running   0          7m22s
cert-manager-cainjector-7477d56b47-ct8dv            1/1     Running   0          7m22s
cert-manager-webhook-6d5cb854fc-2rx9p               1/1     Running   0          7m22s
gateway-api-test-broker-10                          1/1     Running   0          82s
gateway-api-test-broker-11                          1/1     Running   0          82s
gateway-api-test-broker-12                          1/1     Running   0          82s
gateway-api-test-controller-0                       1/1     Running   0          82s
gateway-api-test-entity-operator-6657fbc775-w4b65   2/2     Running   0          44s
strimzi-cluster-operator-6948497896-s7q46           1/1     Running   0          2m23s
```

#### Creating `TLSRoute`s

> Next, we will need to create four `TLSRoute`'s:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Next, we will need to create four `TLSRoute`s:
```

* A `bootstrap` one that points to the bootstrap service.
* A `TLSRoute` for each broker that is deployed.

> It will be as follows:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `TLSRoute` definitions look like this:
```

  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: my-gateway
    namespace: strimzi
    sectionName: kafka-listener
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - group: ""
      kind: Service
      name: gateway-api-test-broker-obiwan-11
      port: 9092
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: gateway-api-test-broker-12
  namespace: strimzi
spec:
  hostnames:
  - broker-12.strimzi.gateway.api.test
  parentRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: my-gateway
    namespace: strimzi
    sectionName: kafka-listener
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - group: ""
      kind: Service
      name: gateway-api-test-broker-obiwan-12
      port: 9092
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: TLSRoute
metadata:
  name: gateway-api-test-bootstrap
  namespace: strimzi
spec:
  hostnames:
  - bootstrap.strimzi.gateway.api.test
  parentRefs:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: my-gateway
    namespace: strimzi
    sectionName: kafka-listener
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - group: ""
      kind: Service
      name: gateway-api-test-kafka-obiwan-bootstrap
      port: 9092
```

```

> kubectl apply -f tls-routes.yaml

Reviewer 4: are we following along on github again here? i wonder if we just need to mention that in the first instance.  "If you are following along in GitHub, you just need to apply the YAML configuration files."

1. Download the `sasl.jaas.config` from the `Secret` created for the `KafkaUser`.
2. Download the CA Public Cert created by Cert Manager.
3. Convert the CA Cert from the previous step into the JKS format so that we can use it in our Kafka config.

The following script does all of that and writes a Kafka config file to `/tmp/kafka-client-config.properties`.

```
#!/bin/bash

kubectl get secret my-certificate -o json | jq '.data."ca.crt"' | tr -d '"' | base64 --decode > /tmp/ca.crt
keytool -importcert -alias ca -file /tmp/ca.crt -keystore /tmp/strimzi-kafka-truststore.jks -storepass kenobi

JAAS_CONFIG=$(kubectl get secret obiwan -o json | jq '.data."sasl.jaas.config"' | tr -d '"' | base64 --decode)

cat <<EOF > /tmp/kafka-client-config.properties
bootstrap.servers=bootstrap.strimzi.gateway.api.test:9092
sasl.jaas.config=$JAAS_CONFIG
security.protocol=SASL_SSL
sasl.mechanism=SCRAM-SHA-512
ssl.truststore.location=/tmp/strimzi-kafka-truststore.jks
ssl.truststore.password=kenobi
EOF
```

When running the script make sure to type "yes" to add the certificate to the JKS keystore.
```
./create-kafka-config.sh
cat /tmp/kafka-client-config.properties
```

#### Accessing Kafka

> The last thing we need to do is use our Kafka cluster! We'll use the Strimzi docker images and the `kafka-console-{producer,consumer}.sh` scripts.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The last thing we need to do is use our Kafka cluster! We'll use the Strimzi Docker images and the `kafka-console-{producer,consumer}.sh` scripts.
```
